>>JAY DYER: Is there a deeper,
hidden, more esoteric meaning
to the Hollywood films
that we all love to watch?
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>JAY WEIDNER: And
I'm Jay Weidner,
and you're watching
"Hollywood Decoded."
[THEME MUSIC]
>>DYER: Today we're going to
be talking about "The Lord
of the Rings" trilogy.
So the next film in the
trilogy is "The Two Towers."
And wow.
What a name, right?
We immediately
think of 9/11, and I
do believe there's a 9/11
significance to this.
Jay agrees.
He's got a lot of facts on that
that we're going to talk about.
But "The Two Towers"
represents the kind
of "Empire Strikes Back"
sequel where we almost
think that the good guys
aren't going to make it, right?
The bad guys seem to
get the upper hand.
This is classic in trilogies.
But what we're going to look at
is the spiritual transformation
of Gandalf, which is very
important in this scene,
and the revelation from Saruman
that he's actually a bad guy
and that the war
machine, the Pentagon,
the military-industrial
complex that we're
being warned about
from Tolkien, this
is all at the aegis of Sauron.
Satan, right?
Who sits atop as a flaming
eye, the all-seeing eye, right?
The races are
divided and conquered
by this one all-seeing eye.
Jay, what do you think?
>>WEIDNER: Oh, I think
that Tolkien was definitely
aware of the all-seeing
eye of Freemasonry
and was trying to warn us
about the new world order.
There's no coincidence.
>>DYER: Two towers right
around the time of 9/11?
>>WEIDNER: Well,
that's the thing.
The first movie was
released in December 2001,
and we were all
reeling from 9/11.
And we kind of needed
this movie at this time.
And I know I did.
And then when the second
movie came out a year later
and it was called
"The Two Towers"
and it started
calling forth, you
know, this idea that possibly
9/11 was the beginning
of the end of our Fourth Age.
Another thing that
occurs to me, I
saw a painting by Alex Gray
the other day called "Gaia."
And it had the Tree of Life.
And on one side, it had
the world as we like it,
and it was very much
like a Middle Earth,
a very pleasant world
of beautiful plants.
And then the other side was
the world that we don't want.
And oddly enough, this painting
was painted years before 9/11,
and it has the Twin Towers
and two airplanes flying by.
So again, art is prophetic.
>>DYER: Prophetic, yeah.
>>WEIDNER: And I think
Tolkien again was somehow--
I don't think he
knew, except maybe
intuitively, that somehow,
when the Hollywood
version of this thing came
out, it would have something
to do with the end of this age.
>>DYER: Right.
In the late 1800s, Dostoyevsky
wrote "The Possessed,"
or "Demons."
And in that novel, the
revolutionary socialists
actually say that they're going
to bring in the utopia on top
of 100 million skulls.
So that's actually 30,
40 years prior to 1917,
the Bolshevik
Revolution, and then
we had the Maoist
Revolution later.
So you have over
100 million souls
dying as a result of this.
And I think that's a key example
of literature being prophetic.
And I see "The Lord of the
Rings" in the exact same vein,
something prophetic
because it's looking
back to mythological archetypes
and patterns in history.
And so many great
philosophers and historians
have talked about these
cycles and patterns.
Oswald Spengler wrote
"Decline of the West,"
and he talks about
these ages, these yugas.
And that's what Tolkien's
warning us about.
And I think you're
absolutely right, that 9/11--
9 is a symbol, a
number in numerology
that relates to initiation, and
particularly dark initiation,
the dark path.
And so I think that
what happened on 9/11
was a kind of initiation,
an attempt to maintain
the dark power as it's
crumbling, as it's actually
falling apart in the midst
of spiritual transformation
and awakening.
That's what this scene with
Gandalf battling the Balrog
and coming back, and
why it's so important.
>>WEIDNER: I think
that the parallels
between the time that
the movie came out
and what Tolkien
is trying to say
were so strange
in that there was
like this weird coincidence
going on that Tolkien
had nothing to do with.
Yet somehow, it
came out that way.
>>DYER: But it's
not grim at all,
because just like
with Gandalf, when
Gandalf faces this
seeming demon that there's
no way he could beat this
thing, and he actually
beats it, right?
Frodo is who beats
Sauron, right?
The greatest spiritual evil
in all of Middle Earth.
And so I think in the same way,
we might see things like 9/11,
we might think that, oh,
it's the end or something.
Like, no, it's not.
When we overcome these things,
when we overcome traumas,
we're actually--
like Gandalf, we're taken to
a whole other spiritual level.
>>WEIDNER: Now I
think in a way today,
we're all kind of Frodo,
trying to bring the ring back
to Mount Doom.
And it's up to all of us now
to recognize what's going on
in this world and conquer it.
>>DYER: It's a kind of
spiritual resurrection.
>>WEIDNER: It is.
That's what's going on.
It's a spiritual
resurrection going on.
Again, this has such parallels
with "Lord of the Rings."
>>DYER: Right.
Like the Palantir stone.
Another thing handed
out as a kind of trick
that I think the forces
of good ultimately
turn against the
forces of evil, right?
So let's look at that
overcoming of death
and the demonic by Gandalf
as he comes back in "darkness
took me."
>>GANDALF: Darkness took
me, and I strayed out
of thought and time.
Stars wheeled overhead,
and every day was as long
as a life age of the Earth.
But it was not the end.
I felt life in me again.
[GASP]
I'd been sent back
until my task is done.
>>ARAGORN: Gandalf.
>>GANDALF: Gandalf?
Yes.
That was what they
used to call me.
Gandalf the Grey.
That was my name.
>>GIMLI: Gandalf.
>>GANDALF: I am
Gandalf the White.
>>DYER: So Gandalf himself
overcomes temptation.
If you remember, he's
actually tempted by the ring
as well at the very beginning.
When Frodo attempts to
give it to him, he says no,
but he's tempted.
He has to battle this demon.
And it's only through
overcoming this
that he reaches a new
level of spiritual power.
If you notice, he can't exercise
or never does exercise demons
until he returns as
Gandalf the White.
And then he's able to
successfully overcome
the demonic power
of Saruman that's
controlling the King of Rohan.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
Gandalf is the central
figure of the movie,
moving pieces around on
the gigantic chess board.
He is the alchemist
who knows the future.
It's up to him to
orchestrate these events.
>>DYER: Yeah.
I think he wants us
to at least realize
the potential for
virtuous leadership.
There can be a virtuous leader.
And when there is
a virtuous leader,
it ends up blessing
everyone, right?
But I think that what's
crucial about this scene
is that death is
not to be feared.
That's what everybody
really fears, is dying.
When they embark on this great
journey, the fellowship--
they often talk about
the fear of death.
And Gandalf is the one who dies.
And he comes back, and he has
a conversation with Pippin
and he says, it's
nothing to fear.
It's something that is necessary
for our transformation.
And you notice he
actually becomes
united to his higher
self, to the ideal
of who he was supposed to be.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
That's what that whole
entire sequence is about,
is him becoming fully
into his fullness.
And now that he's in his
fullness, he can defeat Sauron.
And that's what that's about.
It's really important
that we understand
that the king that's going
to take over the Fourth Age
has to have elfin blood in him.
That elfin blood
inside his human blood
will help his progeny govern
during the Fourth Age.
And I think what
he's saying also--
Tolkien, that is-- is that as
that bloodline becomes diluted,
the evil will rise back up.
And I think that's what
happened in the Third Age.
I think the bloodlines
became diluted.
The elfin bloodlines
They no longer had the
power that they once
had to control Sauron, and
that's how Sauron controls us.
>>DYER: I think you're
right, because you
have explicit mention
of the Uruk-hai, which
are these genetically modified
soldiers, these orc-men hybrids
that are bred for
battle by Saruman.
And it's explicitly
said to be sorcery.
And so I think there is
absolutely this bloodline theme
here.
And we tend to think of that as,
like, an evil Illuminati thing.
But I think it's also
possible that you
can have good bloodlines.
>>WEIDNER: And in
this clip, we're
going to find out that
Aragorn has elfin blood.
>>EOWYN: My uncle told
me a strange thing.
He said that you rode to war
with Thengel, my grandfather.
But he must be mistaken.
>>ARAGORN: King Theoden
has a good memory.
He was only a small
child at the time.
>>EOWYN: Then you
must be at least 60.
>>ARAGORN: No.
>>EOWYN: 70?
You cannot be 80?
>>ARAGORN: 87.
>>EOWYN: You are
one of the Dunedain,
a descendant of Numenor,
blessed with long life.
It was said that your race
had passed into legend.
>>ARAGORN: There
are few of us left.
The Northern Kingdom
was destroyed long ago.
>>EOWYN: I'm sorry.
>>WEIDNER: So now
we know why Aragorn
is going to rule at the
beginning of the Fourth Age.
>>DYER: Yeah.
A lot of religious
traditions have this idea
of back in the primeval
era, the golden age,
that there was a
longer lifespan.
We see that in the Bible.
We see that in the Vedas.
We see that in the
Mesopotamian texts.
And I think that's definitely
where he's drawing from,
and that there's
something about bloodlines
and genetic memories,
race memories.
That's actually a real thing.
Modern geneticists
have confirmed
the existence of race memories.
And so I think Tolkien is very
fascinating in that he lived
prior to a lot of
genetic discoveries,
but he's actually
kind of echoing
these ideas from mythology.
>>WEIDNER: That's right.
He was picking up
whatever science
that they were using back then.
They claim it was magic.
But I think definitely,
Tolkien wants
us to understand that
this was a magical world,
and that this magic was
a kind of a technology,
and controlling everything.
And that's how Sauron
could control--
>>DYER: It is.
And Sauron and Saruman are
using sorcery, black magic.
That's what it is.
It's evil science, and
that's why they have
weaponry, bombs, gunpowder.
And they genetically
modify the Uruk-hai.
That's an actual
breeding of orc and men
to have this sort of dog
race that is cannibalistic
that goes out and
eats their opponents.
And so that knowledge or
hermetic science or magic
can be turned to good or evil.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, and Tolkien
is definitely saying that.
Again, we look at this film and
we see a vast nesting of ideas.
And the book too.
A vast nesting of ideas,
of historical ideas,
spiritual ideas, the idea
that even at the darkest hour,
we can still win.
That we have help from
more than human beings
who maybe even live here
among us like Gandalf,
and maybe they
still live among us.
We don't know.
There's definitely rumors
in modern alchemy circles
that there's a group of people
that are wizards who control
events through deep meditation.
And they're good
wizards, and they're
fighting the Illuminati
and the bad guys.
Just like Gandalf, they're using
their powers in a subtle way
to manipulate the opposition to
frustrate the powers that be.
And I think that's
exactly what Gandalf
is doing in this series.
So Arwen has a choice.
She can either go to
the west with the elves,
or she can stay with her
love, Aragorn, right?
And she is debating with herself
whether she should do this.
And this clip kind
of shows both sides
of what will happen if she
decides to become a human
or live in the human
world and watch everyone
that she knows die off while
she keeps her semi-immortality.
It's a great clip.
I think it's Jackson at
his finest, actually.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>ELROND: Arwen.
[SPEAKING FOREIGN LANGUAGE]
>>ARWEN: I have made my choice.
>>ELROND: He is not coming back.
Why do you linger here
when there is no hope?
>>ARWEN: There is still hope.
>>ELROND: If Aragorn
survives this war,
you will still be parted.
If Sauron is defeated and
Aragorn made king and all
that you hope for
comes true, you
will still have to taste
the bitterness of mortality.
Whether by the sword or
the slow decay of time,
Aragorn will die.
>>WEIDNER: Arwen is
sacrificing herself so that--
for actually, the
good of humanity.
>>DYER: Right.
Because he needs a
bloodline for the king.
Yeah.
That's right.
And that's why this has
so much melancholy in it.
But also, again,
a very optimistic
view that the elves
would give us such a gift
as their bloodline, and
help us as we become
the leaders of the Fourth Age.
>>DYER: Right.
And that's why that tree, which
is so significant at the White
City, the Tree of
the King, as it said.
If we think about
ancient Nordic mythology,
we have what's called
Yggdrasil, and that's
the Nordic Tree of Life.
And it's this giant
tree that expands
throughout the entire universe.
The universe is conceived
as a big living tree.
And here, that tree
is placed as symbolic
of the life of the king
and his royal bloodline.
And so for humanity to continue
in the Middle Earth world,
it needs that leadership.
It needs that strength
that can overcome Mordor.
And it's only Aragorn
that can do that,
but he needs a royal
bloodline, and so
that's where that
sacrificial aspect of Arwen
comes into play here.
You're absolutely right.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, and it
also recalls King Arthur.
>>DYER: Yes.
>>WEIDNER: And when King Arthur
is betrayed by Sir Lancelot,
the kingdom dies.
His entire kingdom begins dying.
The trees die, the
crops stop growing,
and everything because the
love has been taken out
of the situation.
But when he's reunited
with everybody,
then the kingdom reunites
and it starts growing again.
And when Aragorn
becomes the king,
the White Tree comes back--
>>DYER: It comes
back to life, right.
It's Edenic imagery
of the tree of life.
Exactly.
>>WEIDNER: As if there is a
kind of a link between the Earth
and our soul.
Soil and soul.
And this is an old myth that--
you know, because we die and
we decay and turn into the soil
that we are the soil
and we are the Earth,
and that's what they're
saying in "Lord of the Rings."
So this clip is what you
mentioned just a few minutes
ago, about Gandalf explaining
what death is like to Pippin.
>>PIPPIN: I didn't think
it would end this way.
>>GANDALF: End?
No, the journey
doesn't end here.
Death is just another path,
one that we all must take.
The gray rain-curtain of
this world rolls back,
and all turns to silver glass.
And then you see it.
>>PIPPIN: What?
Gandalf?
See what?
>>GANDALF: White shores, and
beyond a far green country
under a swift sunrise.
>>PIPPIN: Oh.
That isn't so bad.
>>GANDALF: No.
No, it isn't.
>>WEIDNER: So in this clip,
clearly, Gandalf is saying,
there's an afterlife.
There's a life after this life.
He's not real clear about it
except that it's beautiful.
And I think we've seen enough
near-death experiences very
similar to what he's explaining
to know that death probably
is not the grievous experience
that we're being taught it is,
and it's actually
probably a relief.
And I think that's what
Gandalf is conveying here.
And it is also conveying
the overall optimism
of Tolkien and Peter Jackson.
That in the end, we're
going to get this right,
and there really
is nothing to fear.
>>DYER: Yeah, it's
the microcosm.
The microcosm, right?
What happens to the
individuals in the film
when they face up to death,
to their fears and so forth
and overcome it,
it's the same way
with what Tolkien's warning us
about with the new world order,
with the Pentagon, the
military-industrial complex,
all of that.
It looks bleak, but
we always overcome.
Humanity survives.
There's an afterlife.
We don't have to fear death.
And that's what's
so great and so
relieving is this scene where
you see the fall of the eye.
[LAUGH]
That's one of my
favorite scenes in I
think all of movie
history, because it's
so significant, so symbolic.
>>WEIDNER: You know, it goes
back to Freemasonic symbology
and how Tolkien and
Peter Jackson are
both very aware of this.
And Peter Jackson shows it
as a surveillance operation,
which it is.
>>DYER: Exactly.
So let's look at
the fall of the eye.
[YELLING]
[CREAKING]
Do you notice all the armies
surround the small camp there,
and it looks like
they're about to lose.
Like "Rocky," you know, at
the end, he's about to lose.
But what happens is, of
course, Frodo's successful,
and that's where you see
that look on Gandalf's face,
that his gambit paid
off, and it worked.
And the reason this
scene is so significant
is because as you mentioned,
it operates on so many levels.
I think what we have happening
on the spiritual plane
with the character
Sauron basically
wanting a total domination
and control, right?
When Saruman possesses the
King of Rohan, it's possession.
He wants tyranny,
he wants domination,
and to stamp out freedom.
And in the same way,
spiritually-speaking
in our world politically,
socially, there
are forces that would seek
to dominate and control
and to stamp out freedom.
And that NSA technology
of surveillance
that is that all-seeing
eye in a real sense
on our plane of reality,
it can be stamped down.
I think eventually it will.
Because once we realize that
this stuff is anti-human
and it's self-destructive,
it's going to fall.
And I really literally
think that Tolkien
is predicting the fall of this.
>>WEIDNER: I do too.
I think he's, in the
end, he's an optimist.
And I think he's telling
us that, yes, you're
going to be going through the
end of your own Fourth Age
probably, ye the
reader of these books.
But in the end, these
four little hobbits
and really the whole
series is through the point
of view of the four hobbits.
They're in every scene.
A hobbit is in every scene
except for the scenes
where Saruman is talking
in his castle keep.
And I think that
we're supposed to see
these events through
the hobbits' eyes,
because they're like children.
And Tolkien wants us to see
this whole thing through kind
of the eyes of a child.
That's why the book
is masquerading
as a children's book.
>>DYER: Yeah.
The cold, bleak forces of
tech cannot offer anything
to the soul of man.
All they can offer is
these petty promises
of maybe a little bit longer
life, just like the ring.
And that's why the ring
has to be destroyed,
and I think ultimately it will.
That doesn't mean
necessarily that we
have to be Luddites and
get rid of all technology
or go back to some Stone Age.
But rather, that we're
going to wise up.
And instead of just
having better knowledge,
actually have wisdom about
the way we use technology.
And so that is why this
next sequence, which I think
shows us the spiritual
message of the film in terms
of humility and, as I said,
the David and Goliath,
the humility and
simplicity of life
is actually what
overcomes this darkness.
So let's look at "My
friends, you bow to no one."
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>>ARAGORN: My friends,
you bow to no one.
>>DYER: Very simply
put, it's really--
it's just courage, bravery,
friendship, humility.
These are the virtues
that will actually
topple the new world order.
They're the virtues that give
us courage in the face of death,
or whatever comes
our way, because we
know it's not the end.
And we have certainty.
We have certitude.
We have spiritual fulfillment
through the practice
of those virtues.
And it's those four hobbits
that are the only characters who
could have saved Middle Earth.
And I think that
that's the message
that Tolkien's trying to send
us, is that it's the everyman.
It's the everyday guy who, if
he can understand these things
and practice
virtue, that will be
the end of the spiritual
forces and death.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah, the
little guy will win out
is what Tolkien is saying.
And he doesn't mean the middle--
or the working class.
He doesn't mean
the working class.
He's talking about the humble.
And I think it can't
be underestimated,
the sacrifice also
that Frodo and Sam make
to get to Mount Doom, knowing
that there's no way out.
They're going there,
and then that's it.
There's no plan after they
throw the ring in the volcano.
And that in itself just shows
an amazing amount of courage
to do that to save
the world and again, I
think we're all in this day
and age have to be Frodo.
We have to be brave.
We have to stand up to
the forces of darkness
and do what we can to peacefully
dismantle the machine.
>>DYER: So my takeaway was,
as I said at the beginning,
these four levels
that really teach us
important spiritual truths.
You have the beginning
with this ancient history,
this world 7,000 years ago that
may or may not have existed.
I don't know.
But regardless, at that
mythological, allegorical
level, we're learning
eternal perennial truths
about good versus
evil, the overcoming
of evil, spiritual
transformation.
There's also that
alchemical level
of where we see moral
messages through the victories
of different characters.
Gandalf, you know, coming to a
higher spiritual consciousness.
And we have that prophetic
level where, I think,
he's telling us about our age,
our time, the end of our age,
maybe even prophesying
things like 9/11
or predicting things like the
military-industrial complex,
the NSA, the ring of power.
And that ultimately,
it will fall.
>>WEIDNER: Yeah.
I also have a four
in my takeaway,
and that is the four ages.
And I think he's really
definitely talking
about these four ages.
I think he believes
it very sincerely.
And the whole idea that
there's a sharp end
to an age and a sharp beginning
to an age, I find fascinating,
and I think that he
finds it fascinating.
And I think that in the
end, what he's saying
is that we're ultimately
spiritual creatures,
and we will defeat the
forces of materialism.
Because that is what
the dark forces are.
They're forces of materialism.
And when Saruman says, you
know, take down the trees,
take them all down--
>>DYER: (DEEP VOICE)
Rip them all down.
>>WEIDNER: --that is the whole
message of the dark side.
>>DYER: Join us again next
time on "Hollywood Decoded."
I'm Jay Dyer.
>>WEIDNER: And I'm Jay Weidner.
Thanks for watching.
[THEME MUSIC]